I remember the very first time I went to
a nice restaurant a really nice
restaurant it was for a law firm
recruitment dinner and I remember
beforehand the waitress walked around
and asked whether we wanted some wine so
I said sure I'll take some white wine
and she immediately said would you like
Selma Young Blanc or Chardonnay and I
remember thinking come on Lady stop with
the fancy French words and just gives me
some white wine but I used my powers of
deduction and recognized that Chardonnay
and Sauvignon Blanc were two separate
types of white wine and so I told her
that I would take the Chardonnay because
frankly that was the easiest one to
pronounce for me so I had a lot of
experiences like that during my first
couple of years as a law student at Yale
because despite all outward appearances
I'm a cultural outsider I didn't come
from the elites I didn't come from the
Northeast or from San Francisco I came
from a southern Ohio steel town and it's
a town that's really struggling in a lot
of ways the ways that are indicative of
the broader struggles of America's
working-class heroine has moved in
killing a lot of people people I know
family violence domestic violence and
divorce have torn apart families and
there's a very unique sense of pessimism
that's moved in think about rising
mortality rates in these communities and
recognize that for a lot of these folks
the problems that they're seeing are
actually causing rising death rates in
their own communities so there's a very
real sense of struggle
now I had a very front-row seat to that
struggle my family has been part of that
struggle for a very long time I come
from a family that doesn't have a whole
lot of money the addiction that plagued
my community also plagued my family and
even sadly my own mom there were a lot
of problems that I saw and my own family
problems cause sometimes by lack of
money problems caused sometimes by lack
of access to resources and social
capital that really affected my life if
you had looked at my life when I was 14
years old and said
well what's going to happen to this kid
you would have concluded that I would
have struggled with what academics call
upward mobility so upward mobility is an
abstract term but it strikes at
something that's very core at the heart
of the American Dream it's the sense and
it measures whether kids like me who
grow up in poor communities are going to
live a better life whether they're going
to have a chance to live a materially
better existence or whether they're
going to stay in the circumstances where
they came from and one of the things
we've learned unfortunately is that
upward mobility isn't as high as we'd
like it to be in this country and
interestingly it's very geographically
distributed so take Utah for instance
and Utah a poor kid is actually doing
okay very likely to live their share and
their part and the American Dream but if
you think of where I'm from in the south
and Appalachia in southern Ohio it's
very unlikely that kids like that will
rise the American Dream in those parts
of the country is in a very real sense
just a dream so why is that happening so
one reason is obviously economic or
structural so you think of these areas
they're beset by these terrible economic
trends built around industries like coal
and steel that make it harder for folks
to get ahead it's certainly one problem
there's also the problem of brain drain
where they're really talented people
because they can't find high skill work
at home end up moving elsewhere so they
don't build a business or nonprofit
where they're from they end up going
elsewhere and taking their talents with
them there are failing schools in a lot
of these communities failing to give
kids the educational leg up that really
makes it possible for kids to have
opportunities later in life these things
are all important I don't mean to
discount these structural barriers but
when I look back at my life and at my
community something else was going on
something else mattered
it's difficult to quantify but it was no
less real so for starters there was a
very real sense of hopelessness and the
community that I grew up in there was a
sense that kids had that their choices
didn't matter no matter what happened no
matter how hard they worked no matter
how hard they tried to get ahead
nothing good would happen so that's a
tough feeling to grow up around
that's a tough mindset to penetrate and
it leads some putt times to very
conspiratorial places so let's just take
one political issue that's pretty hot
affirmative action so depending on your
politics you might think the deformative
action is either a wise or an unwise way
to promote diversity in the workplace to
the classroom but if you grow up in an
area like this you see affirmative
action is a tool to hold people like you
back that's especially true if you're a
member of the white working-class you
see it as something that isn't just
about good or bad policy you see it as
something that's actively conspiring
where people with political and
financial power are working against you
and there are a lot of ways that you see
that conspiracy against you perceived
real but it's there and it warps
expectations so if you think about what
do you do when you grow up in that world
you can respond in a couple of ways one
you can say I'm not going to work hard
because no matter how hard I work it's
not going to matter another thing you
might do is say well I'm not going to go
after the traditional markers of success
like a university education or
prestigious job because the people who
care about those things are unlike me
they're never going to let me in when I
got admitted to Yale a family member
asked me if I had pretended to be a
liberal to get it by the admissions
committee this is seriously and it's
obviously not the case that there was a
liberal box to check on the application
but it speaks at a very real insecurity
in these places that you have to pretend
to be somebody or not to get past these
various social barriers it's a very
significant problem even if you don't
give in to that hopelessness even if you
think let's say that your choices matter
and you want to make the good choices
you want to do better for yourself and
for your family it's sometimes hard to
even know what those choices are when
you grow up in a community like I did I
didn't know for example that you had to
go to law school to be a lawyer I didn't
know that elite universities as research
consistently tells us are cheaper for
low-income kids because these
universities have bigger endowments can
offer more gender
financial aid I remember I learned this
when I got the financial aid letter from
Yale for myself
tens of thousand dollars in need-based
aid which is a term I had never heard
before but I turned to my aunt when I
got that letter and said you know I
think this just means that for the first
time in my life being poor has paid
really well so I didn't have access to
that information because the social
networks around me didn't have access to
that information I learned from my
community how to shoot a gun how to
shoot it well I learned how to make a
damn good biscuit recipe the trick by
the way is frozen butter not warm butter
but I didn't learn how to get ahead I
didn't learn how to make the good
decisions about education and
opportunity that you need to do to debt
it to make to actually have a chance in
this 21st century knowledge economy
economists call the value that we gain
from our informal networks from our
friends and colleagues and family social
capital the social capital that I had
wasn't built for 21st century America
and it showed there's something else
that's really important that's going on
that our community doesn't like to talk
about but it's very real working-class
kids are much more likely to face what's
called adverse childhood experiences
which is just a famous word fancy word
for childhood trauma getting hit or
yelled at put down by a parent
repeatedly watching someone hit or beat
your parent watching someone do drugs or
abuse alcohol these are all instances of
childhood trauma and they're pretty
commonplace in my family importantly
they're not just commonplace in my
family right now
they're also multi-generational so my
grandparents the very first time that
they had kids they expected that they
were going to raise them in a way that
was uniquely good they were middle class
they are able to earn a good wage in a
steel mill but one end up happening is
that they expose their kids to a lot of
the childhood trauma that had gone back
many generations my mom was 12 when she
saw my grandma set my grandfather on
fire his crime wasn't he came home drunk
after she told him if you come home
drunk I'm gonna kill you she tried to do
it
think about the way that that affects a
child's mind and we think of these
things as especially rare but study by
the Wisconsin children's trust fund
found that 40 percent of low-income kids
face multiple instances of childhood
trauma compared to only 29 percent for
upper income kids and think about what
that really means if you're a low income
kid almost half of you face multiple
instances of childhood trauma this is
not an isolated problem this is a very
significant issue we know what happens
to the kids who experience that life
they're more likely to do drugs more
likely to go to jail more likely to drop
out of high school and most importantly
they're more likely to do to their
children what their parents did to them
this trauma this chaos in the home is
our culture's very worst gift to our
children and it's a gift that keeps on
giving
so you combine all that the hopelessness
the despair the cynicism about the
future the childhood trauma the low
social capital and you begin to
understand why me at the age of 14 was
ready to become just another statistic
another kid who failed to beat the odds
but something unexpected happened I did
beat the odds
things turned up for me I graduated from
high school from college I went to law
school and I have a pretty good job now
so what happened one thing that happened
is that my grandparents the same
grandparents of setting someone on fire
Fame they really shaped up by the time I
came around they provided me a stable
home stable family they made sure that
when my parents weren't able to do the
things that kids need they stepped in
and filled that role my grandma
especially did two things that really
mattered one she provided that peaceful
home that allowed me to focus on
homework and the things that kids should
be focused on but she was also this
incredibly perceptive woman despite not
even having a middle school education
she recognized the message that my
community had for me that my choice
is didn't matter that the deck was
stacked against me she once told me JD
never be like those losers who think the
deck is stacked against them you can do
anything you want to and yet she
recognized that life wasn't fair it's
hard to strike that balance to tell a
kid that life isn't fair but also
recognize and enforce in them the
reality that their choices matter but
Mammal was able to strike that balance
the other thing that really helped was
the United States Marine Corps so we
think of the Marine Corps as a military
outfit and of course it is but for me
the US Marine Corps was a four-year
crash course and character education
taught me how to make a bed how to do
laundry how to wake up early how to
manage my finances these are things my
community didn't teach me remember when
I went to go buy a car for the very
first time I was offered dealers low low
interest rate of 21.9% I was ready to
sign on the dotted line but I didn't
take that deal because I went and took
it to my officer who told me stop being
an idiot go to the local credit union
and get a better deal and so that's what
I did
but without the Marine Corps I would
have never had access to that knowledge
I would have had a financial calamity
frankly last thing I want to say is that
I had a lot of good fortune and the
mentors and people who have played an
important role in my life from the
Marines from Ohio State from Yale from
other places people have really stepped
in and ensured that they filled that
social capital gap that it was pretty
obvious apparently that I had that comes
from good fortune but a lot of children
aren't going to have that good fortune
and I think that raises really important
questions for all of us about how we're
going to change that we need to ask
questions about how we're going to give
low-income kids who come from a broken
home access to a loving home need to ask
questions about how we're going to teach
low-income parents how to better
interact with their children with their
partners you'd ask questions about how
we give social capital' mentorship to
low-income kids who don't have it we
need to think about how we teach
working-class children about not just
hard skills like reading mathematics
but also soft skills like conflict
resolution and financial management now
I don't have all of the answers I don't
know all of the solutions to this
problem but I do know this in southern
Ohio right now there's a kid who's
anxiously awaiting their dad wondering
whether when he comes through the door
he'll walk calmly or stumble drunk Lee
here's a kid whose mom sticks a needle
in her arm and passes out and he doesn't
know why she doesn't cook him dinner and
he goes to bed hungry that night there's
a kid who has no hope for the future but
desperately wants to live a better life
they just want somebody to show it to
them I don't have all the answers
but I know that if unless our society
starts asking better questions about why
I was so lucky
and about how to give that luck to more
of our communities and our country's
children we're going to continue to have
a very significant problem thank